grace/simulator/README.md, before:

# Creating a synthetic dataset with shapes

## Drawing geometric shapes onto a random graph:

This README.md contains instructions on how to create a synthetic dataset with random geometric shapes (currently squares, circles and stars) drown around each node of a random graph.

The random graph has the noise nodes set as `true_negatives (TN)`, whereas all the nodes which are part of an object are marked as `true_positives (TP)`.

Therefore, when drawing these geometric objects, all `TN` nodes will be placed on patches marked with 0.0 < values < 0.5, whilst all `TP` nodes will be marked with 0.5 < values < 1.0.


## Creating a dataset to benchmark GRACE:

To create a synthetic dataset, activate your environment and run:

```sh
python grace/simulator/simulate_dataset.py
```

The script has a few pre-set hyperparameters which can be changed:

```sh
VALUE = 0.5   # background value of the image canvas
SCALE = 3500   # whole image shape assuming a square shape
NUM_IMAGES = 10   # number of new images to synthesize
PATCH_SIZE = 224   # size of the patch to modify under each node
MOTIF = "lines"   # type of geometric object to draw (extends to 'circles', 'curves', 'spiral' or 'mixed')
DRAWING = "squares"   # type of modification of the patch (extends to 'circles' or 'stars')
PADDING = (112, 112)   # padding of the image in case boundary nodes & their patches need to be modified, too - otherwise nodes lying too close to the boundary will be left untouched
```

Happy simulating :-)

Commit message:

Document the graph feature storage in local README.md

grace/simulator/README.md, after:

# Creating a synthetic dataset with shapes

## Drawing geometric shapes onto a random graph:

This README.md contains instructions on how to create a synthetic dataset with random geometric shapes (currently squares, circles and stars) drown around each node of a random graph.

The random graph has the noise nodes set as `true_negatives (TN)`, whereas all the nodes which are part of an object are marked as `true_positives (TP)`.

Therefore, when drawing these geometric objects, all `TN` nodes will be placed on patches marked with 0.0 < values < 0.5, whilst all `TP` nodes will be marked with 0.5 < values < 1.0.


## Creating a dataset to benchmark GRACE:

To create a synthetic dataset, activate your environment and run:

```sh
python grace/simulator/simulate_dataset.py
```

The script has a few pre-set hyperparameters which can be changed:

```sh
VALUE = 0.5   # background value of the image canvas
SCALE = 3500   # whole image shape assuming a square shape
NUM_IMAGES = 10   # number of new images to synthesize
PATCH_SIZE = 224   # size of the patch to modify under each node
MOTIF = "lines"   # type of geometric object to draw (extends to 'circles', 'curves', 'spiral' or 'mixed')
DRAWING = "squares"   # type of modification of the patch (extends to 'circles' or 'stars')
PADDING = (112, 112)   # padding of the image in case boundary nodes & their patches need to be modified, too - otherwise nodes lying too close to the boundary will be left untouched
```

## Storing the node features directly in the graph:

If you want to perform a hyperparameter grid search for GNN training and you know that the (node) features of your graph dataset won't change, you can run this script to make sure you append the resnet-extracted features to your dataset graphs once and for all. It takes ~30-40 seconds per single image to get processed, so this significantly saves time if launching multiple runs on your (otherwise constant) dataset.

```sh
python3 grace/simulator/store_features.py --data_path=/Users/kulicna/Desktop/dataset/playground/infer/ --extractor_fn=/Users/kulicna/Desktop/classifier/extractor/resnet152.pt
```

Happy simulating :-)
